---
layout: post
title: COVID-19
categories: epidemiology pandemic
---

I really did not expect 2020 to go this way. I thought it would be quite
different. Maybe you've been living under a rock, so I should catch you up
briefly on what's happened in 2020. In December of last year, the city of Wuhan
suffered a serious coronavirus outbreak. Though China attempted to contain it,
the virus is quite contagious and by January of 2020, outbreaks were seeded in
major cities around the world.

What follows is a brief academic exercise meant to illustrate the epidemiology
underlying the SARS-COV-2 outbreak. In later posts, I may delve more deeply
into the biology of the disease. For now, I want to talk about the mechanics of
population level infection, and why pandemics are fundamentally NOT a medical
problem in the sense that non-prophylactic treatments are largely unable to help
bring an end to this.

# The SIR model

The simplest epidemiological model is called the
**S**usceptible-**I**nfected-**R**ecovered model, and it can be written down in
a succint form as a set of two differential equations:

$$
\frac{d}{dt}S = - \mu \cdot I \ cdot S,

\frac{d}{dt}I = \mu \cdot I \cdot S - \gamma I.
$$

The first equation says that the rate at which susceptible people get infected
is the result of interactions between **I**nfected individuals and susceptible
individuals, boosted by an infectivity parameter, $\mu$.

The second equation says that the rate of change in the number of infected people
is the result of the number of new infections per day minus the number of
people that recover (we are ignoring deaths in this model).
